*note: this is integrative3*
1. Update  your KWL Chart based on what you have learned.
1. Contribute to your group repo and review a team mate's PR.
2. Install [ gcc](https://gcc.gnu.org/install/) locally and practice using it.  Repeat steps we did in class on your computer and then change the order of parameters; try skipping steps to produce errors, etc. Export the list of variations you tried and summarize what you learned as a list of tips and reminders on what the parameters do/why/when you would need them (or not) in {index}`gcctips.md`.  (to reinforce what we learned)
3. Create some variations of the `hello.c` we made in class. Make `hello2.c` print twice with 2 print commands. Make `hello5.c` print 5 times with a for loop and `hello7.c` print 7 times with a for loop. Build them all on the command line and make sure they run correctly. 
4. Write a bash script, {index}`assembly.sh` to compile each program to assembly and print the number of lines in each file.  
5. Put the output of your script in {index}`hello_assembly_compare.md`. Add to the file some notes on how they are similar or different based on your own reading of them.  
1. Read about [sbatch](https://web.uri.edu/hpc-research-computing/using-seawulf/#sbatch). Answer the following in {index}`hpc.md` of your KWL repo:  (to think about how the design of the system we used in class impacts programming and connect it to other ideas taught in CS)
    ```
    1. What kinds of things would your code need to do if you were going to run it on an HPC system?
    2. What Sbatch options seem the most helpful?
    3. How might you go about setting the time limits for a script? How could you estimate how long it will take?
    ```