*note: this is integrative3*
1. Update more rows on your KWL Chart based on what we did today.
1. Contribute to your group repo and review a team mate's PR
2. Install [ gcc](https://gcc.gnu.org/install/) locally and practice using it.  Repeat steps we did in class on your computer and then change the order of parameters; try skipping steps to produce errors, etc. Export the list of variations you tried and summarize what you learned as a list of tips and reminders on what the parameters do/why/when you would need them (or not) in {index} `gcctips.md`.  (to reinforce what we learned)
3. Write two short programs that do the same thing in different ways and compile them both to assembly (eg using a for vs while loop to sum numbers up to a number). Check the assembly to see if they produce the same thing or if it's different. Save your code (in code blocks) and notes about your findings in `assemblycompare.md`
4. On Seawulf, modfiy `main.c` from class to accept the integer as a command line argument instead of via input while running the program. [See this tutorial for an example](http://crasseux.com/books/ctutorial/argc-and-argv.html). 
5. Write a bash script that runs your compiled program for each integer from 10 to 30 (syntax for a range is `{start..end}` so this would be `{10..30}`)
6. Create an sbatch script to run your script  on a compute node and save the output to a file. The sbatch script should compile and link the program and then call the script. [see the options](https://web.uri.edu/hpc-research-computing/using-seawulf/#sbatch)
7. use [scp](https://www2.stat.duke.edu/comp/security/scp_man.html) to download your modified main, script files, and output to your local computer and include them in your kwl repo. 
8. Answer the following in {index}`hpc.md` of your KWL repo:  (to think about how the design of the system we used in class impacts programming and connect it to other ideas taught in CS)
    ```
    1. What kinds of things would your code need to do if you were going to run it on an HPC system?
    2. What Sbatch options seem the most helpful?
    3. How might you go about setting the time limits for a script? How could you estimate how long it will take?
    ```