# Bash intro & git offline 


## Open a Terminal 

````{tab-set}
```{tab-item} Windows
Use Git for Windows aka GitBash. This program emulates bash for you. 
```
```{tab-item}
On mac open a terminal window. By default your terminal uses zsh. You may change to bash using the `bash` command or use `zsh`.  They are mostly the same. 
```
````

My terminal reminds me that using bash is not Apple's preference
```
Last login: Sun Jan 29 11:50:33 on ttys017

The default interactive shell is now zsh.
To update your account to use zsh, please run `chsh -s /bin/zsh`.
For more details, please visit https://support.apple.com/kb/HT208050.
```

## Getting Organized. 
To view where we are, we **p**rint **w**orking **d**irectory using `pwd`.

```
pwd
```

As output we see: 
```
/Users/brownsarahm
```

It prints out the *absolute* path, that begins with a `/` above, we used a relative
path, from the home directory.


Next I can **c**hange **d**irectory with `cd`. To do this, I could use an absolute path of where I want to go or I can use the *relative* path which is the directions from one location to another.  

```
cd Documents/inclass/
```

Here I can **l**i**s**t the files. 
```
ls
```

```
fa22		prog4dssp23
```


Next we'll make a folder for this course

```
mkdir systems
```

Note that making the new folder does not move us into it. 
```
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass
```

For that,we use `cd` again.

```
cd systems/
```

This is an emptry folder, we can confirm with: 
```
ls
```

```
```

To go back one step in the path, (one level up in the tree) we use `cd ..` 
```
cd ..
```

`..` is a special file that points to a specific relative path. 
```
```



```
cds systems/
```

```
bash: cds: command not found
```
notice that command not found is the error when there is a typo 


```
cd systems/
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass/systems
```


```
cd ..
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass
```

If we give no path to `cd` it brings us to home. 
```
cd 
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm
```

Then we can go back. 

```
cd Documents/inclass/systems/
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass/systems
```

We can use two levels up at once like this: 

```
cd ../../
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents
```


```
cd inclass/systems/
```

## Authenticating with GitHub 


We have two choices to Download a repository:
1. clone to maintain a link using git
1. download zip to not have to use git, but have no link


For a public repo, it won't matter, you can use any way to download it that you wuold like, but for a private repo, we need to be authenticated.  


### Authenticating with GitHub

---

There are many ways to authenticate securely with GitHub and other git clients.  We're going to use *easier* ones for today, but we'll come back to the third, which is a bit more secure and is a more general type of authentication.

---



1. ssh keys
1. GitBash built in authentication

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} Windows (GitBash)
Skip straight to clone, then follow the prompts, choosing to authenticate in Browser. 
````

````{tab-item} Windows (WSL)

```{admonition} Let me know what worked
:class: community
```
````

````{tab-item} MacOS X

GitHub CLI: enter the following and follow the prompts.

    ```
    gh auth login
    ```
````

````{tab-item} If nothing else works
Create a [personal access token](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token). This is a special one time password that you can use like a password, but it is limited in scope and will expire (as long as you choose settings well). 

Then proceed to the clone step. You may need to configure an identity later with [`git config`](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-First-Time-Git-Setup)

````
`````

### Cloning a repository

We will create a local copy by cloning

```
git clone https://github.com/introcompsys/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1.git
```

```
Cloning into 'github-in-class-brownsarahm-1'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 8, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (8/8), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (4/4), done.
remote: Total 8 (delta 0), reused 4 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
Receiving objects: 100% (8/8), done.
```

Confirm it worked with: 
```
ls
```

```
github-in-class-brownsarahm-1
```
We see the new folder that matches our repo name


## What is in a repo?


We can enter that folder
```
cd github-in-class-brownsarahm-1/
```

When we compare the local directory to GitHub

```
ls
```

```
README.md
```
Notice that the `.github/workflows` that we see on GitHub is missing,
that is because it is hidden.  All file names that start with `.` are hidden.


We can actually see the rest with the `-a` for **all** *option* or *flag*.  Options are how we can pass non required parameters to command line programs. 

```
ls -a
```

```
.		.git		README.md
..		.github
```
We also see some special "files", `.` the current location and `..` up one directory



## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2023-01-31.md
```



## Prepare for Next Class

```{include} ../_prepare/2023-01-31.md
```



## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2023-01-31.md
```



## Experience Report Evidence

To show you completed this activity, show the output of the following commands in `evidence-2023-01-31.md` in the `experiences folder: 

```
cd path/you/choce/systems
```
where you replace the `path/you/chose` accordingly

```
ls 
cd github-inclass-<yourghusername>
```
with your gh username 

```
ls -a
```

## Questions After Today's Class 

### Questions we will answer next class 

- How do changes that I do to the repo offline update on the github website?
- Does github connect to a file automatically or do i have to connect it manual
- What other command options/flag examples like ls -a?
- When we make changes to our cloned repository, do we need to make commits/pull requests within gitbash, or the equivalent, in order for the changes to showup on the browser github?

### Questions I need clarification from you to be able to answer

__probably go to office hours__

- I would like more clarification on how to navigate the experience reflection badge.
- Why is nothing working lol. I tried downloading the github thing from the command line and nothing worked
- After downloading homebrew, the "gh auth login" still doesn't work. 


### Why is SSH less secure than the HTTPS standard?

SSH keys are secure, but other shell things are not.  Using SSH keys is acutally preferred, but you cannot do other types of command line password operations with GitHub.  git alone, does support HTTPS connection with passwords, but GitHub no longer does.  It only allows you to use PAT (a temporary password), SSH keys, or using the GitHub CLI tool to use your browser.  We will use SSH keys later. 

### Why would we want to create files from Git Bash terminal as opposed to File Explorer or CMD Prompt

bash is not operating specific, so using bash commands can work on more systems including most servers, while CMD commands can only work on Windows (and basically no servers).  File explorer is fine one file at a time, but you cannot automate it. 

### How do you move folders into other folders in terminal once you've created them?

The `mv` command does this. [see its documentation](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/mv.1.html) 

### Is there an easy way to remember shortcuts for terminal?

Lots of practice. 

### is GitHub desktop used less often than git via command line?

I would say yes for a few reasons: 
- I think only novices and nonprogrammers use GitHub desktop extensively.
- It has fewer features. 
- It's not typically avialable on a server. 
- It only works with GitHub, not other servers

The GitHub specific CLI, I do not have a good sense of how often it is used. 