# How can we use logical operations?

# Why do we need to think about bitwise operations?  



Understanding them is prereq to what we will see today and that will help you understand hardware overall.  



You of course will not *need* every single thing we teach you in every single class.  



* Seeing topics once at least is the only way you can make an informed decision to study a topic deeper or not.
* Seeing a topic in more detail than you will use all the time actually helps you build intuition, or deep understanding, of the topic overall, and help you remember what you need to remember




## Bitwise operators review



- & : and
- | : or
- ^ : xor
- ~ : not
- >>: shift right
- <<: shift left



Let's review truth tables for and, or, and xor.




```{list-table} AND
:header-rows: 1
:name: truth-and



* - a
  - b
  - output
* - 0
  - 0
  - 0
* - 0
  - 1
  - 0
* - 1
  - 0
  - 0
* - 1
  - 1
  - 1
```




```{list-table} OR
:header-rows: 1
:name: truth-or



* - a
  - b
  - output
* - 0
  - 0
  - 0
* - 0
  - 1
  - 1
* - 1
  - 0
  - 1
* - 1
  - 1
  - 1
```




```{list-table} XOR
:header-rows: 1
:name: truth-xor



* - a
  - b
  - output
* - 0
  - 0
  - 0
* - 0
  - 1
  - 1
* - 1
  - 0
  - 1
* - 1
  - 1
  - 0
```



In order to implement more complex calculations, using gates, we can use these tables as building blocks compared to the required output.  



There are more gate operations; you can see a simulation for [16 gates](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=gates16)




## Adding with gates



Let's review adding binary numbers. 

**remember, binary is a place-based system like the decimal placed based system you are likely familiar with**



How do you add each of the following: 
- 2 + 3
- 14 + 17
- 65 +37 


Since binary is place-based adding with binary follows the same basic algorithm 

- add the two bits
- carry to the next place if >=2



$$ 101 + 100 = 1001 $$



We first add the ones place and get a 1, then the two's place and get a zero then the 4's place and get 0 with a carried one.  



$$ 010 + 011 = 101 $$



In this case in the ones place we add 0 + 1 to get one, the two ones add to 0 with carry then 1 + 0 + 0 gives another 1.  




let's make a truth table for adding two bits.




```{list-table} Add
:header-rows: 1
:name: truth-add
* - a
  - b
  - out 2's
  - out 1's
* - 0
  - 0
  - 0
  - 0
* - 0
  - 1
  - 0
  - 1
* - 1
  - 0
  - 0
  - 1
* - 1
  - 1
  - 1
  - 0
```



Now, what gate can we use to get the output 1's place bit and what gate can we use to get the output 2's place bit by comparing to the truth tables above.



It turns out the one's place is an xor gate, and the two's place is an and gate.  



This makes up the [half adder, try one out at this simulator](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=half_adder).




So this lets us as two bits, but what about adding a number with more bits?  



We can put multiple together, but there's one more wrinkle: the carry.  



That's what makes a [full adder](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=full_adder) different.  It adds three single bits, or a carry and two bits and outputs the result as a sum bit and a carry bit.  







Then we can link many of those together to get an [8 bit ripple adder](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=ripple_carry_adder).  



Alternatively, we can "lookahead" with the carry bit, passing it forward multiple places all at once, as shown in this [4 bit carry lookahead adder](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=cla_adder).


## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2023-04-13.md
```



## Prepare for Next Class

```{important}
This link is incorrect in the badge PR issue
```

```{include} ../_prepare/2023-04-13.md
```



## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2023-04-13.md
```




## Experience Report Evidence

Nothing separate

## Questions After Today's Class 

Post manually for a community badge. 