# How can I work with branches offline? 


## Review

Recall, We can move around and examine the computer's file structure using shell commands.


```
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm
```

We can ust `tab` to complete once we hav a unique set of characters. If what we have is not unique bash will do nothing when you press tab once, but if you press it multiple tiems it will show you the options: 
```
cd Do
```

```
Documents/ Downloads/ 
```

Let's go back to the github inclass repo.
```
cd Documents/inclass/systems/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1/
```


```
pwd
```

```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass/systems/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1
```

Also recall our one file 
```
ls
```

```
README.md
```
and how to see hidden files. 

```
ls -a
```

```
.		..		.git		.github		README.md
```

## How do I know what git knows? 

[`git status`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-status) is your friend. 

```
git status
```

```
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

this command compares your working directory (what you can see with `ls -a` and all subfolders except the `.git` directorty) to the current state of your `.git` directory. 

## Making a branch with GitHub.

First on an issue, create a branch using the link in the development section of the right side panel. See the [github docs](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/creating-a-branch-for-an-issue) for how to do that. 

Then it gives you two steps to do. We are going to do them one at a time so we can see better what they each do. 

First we will update the `.git` directory without changing the working directory using [git fetch](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-fetch). We have to tell git fetch where to get the data from, we do that using a name of a {term}`remote`. 

```
git fetch origin
```

```
From https://github.com/introcompsys/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1
 * [new branch]      2-create-an-about-file -> origin/2-create-an-about-file
```

We can look at the repo to see what has changed. 

```
git status
```

```
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```
This says nothing, because remember git status tells us the relationship between our working directory and the .git repo. 

Next, we switch to that branch. 

```
git checkout 2-create-an-about-file
```

```
branch '2-create-an-about-file' set up to track 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.
Switched to a new branch '2-create-an-about-file'
```
and verify what happened

```
git status
```

```
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

## Creating a file on the terminal

The `touch` command creates an empty file. 
```
touch about.md
```

We can use `ls` to see our working directory now. 

```bash
:class: cell_input
ls
```

```
README.md	about.md
```
and check how git has changed too? 

```bash
:class: cell_input
git status
```

```console
:class: cell_output
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	about.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

Now we see something new. Git tells us that there is a file in the working directory that it has not been told to track the changes in and it knows nothing.  

It also tells us what we can do next. Under "Untracked files" it gives us advice for how to handle those files specifically. If we had made more than one type of change, there would be multiple subheadings each with their own suggestions. 

The very last line is advice of what do to overall.  

In this case both say to `git add` to track or to include in what will be committed.  Under untracked files is it says `git add <file>...`, in our case this would look like `git add about.md`.  However, remember we learned that the `.`  that is always in every directory is a special "file" that points to the current directory, so we can use that to add **all** files. Since we have only one, the two are equivalent, and the `.` is a common shortcut, because most of the time we want to add everything we have recently worked on in a single commit.   


`git add` puts a file in the "staging area" we can use the staging area to group files together and put  changes to multiple files in a single commit. This is something we **cannot** do on GitHub in the browser, in order to save changes at all, we have to commit. Offline, we can save changes to our computer without commiting at all, and we can group many changes into a single commit. 
```
git add .
```

We will use status to see what has changed. 

```
git status
```

```
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
	new file:   about.md

```
Now that one file is marked as a new file and it is in the group "to be committed". Git also tells us how to undo the thing we just did. 

```{admonition} Try this yourself
:class: anchor

Try making a change, adding it, then restoring it. Use git status to see what happens at each point
```
````{margin}
```{important}
If you forget the `-m` you will be put into `vi` or `vim` text editor. Press `a` to enter `~insert" mode (that will appear on the bottom of the terminal window), type your commit message, then press `escape` to exit insert mode. Then type `:wq`and press enter/return  to write(save) and quit.
``` 
````
Next, we will commit the file.  We use `git commit` for this.  the `-m` option allows us to put our commit message dirctly on the line when we commit.  Notice that unlike commiting on GitHub, we do not choose our branch with the `git commit` command.  We have to be "on" that branch before the `git commit`. 

```
git commit -m "create empty about"
```

```
[2-create-an-about-file 57de0cd] create empty about
 1 file changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 about.md
```

```{warning}
At this point you might get an error or warning about your identity. Follow what git says to either set or update your identity using `git config
```

Remember, the messages that git gives you are designed to try to help you.  The developers of git know it's a complex and powerful tool and that it's hard to remember every little bit.


We again check in with git: 
```
git status
```

```
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/2-create-an-about-file' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Now it tells us we have changes that GitHub does not know about. 

```
ls
```

```
README.md	about.md
```

We can send them to github with `git push`

```
git push
```

```
Enumerating objects: 4, done.
Counting objects: 100% (4/4), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (2/2), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 313 bytes | 313.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To https://github.com/introcompsys/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1.git
   3f54148..57de0cd  2-create-an-about-file -> 2-create-an-about-file
```

This tells us the steps git took to send:
- counts up what is there
- compresses them
- sends them to GitHub
- moves the `2-create-an-about-file` branch on GitHub from commit `3f54148` to commit `57de0cd`
- links the local `2-create-an-about-file` branch to the GitHub `2-create-an-about-file` branch

Remember our directory has other things in it: 

```
ls -a
```

```
.		.git		README.md
..		.github		about.md
```

## What does push do? 

`git push` only sends the `.git` directory.  To see that, we can make a file

```
touch temp
```

but not add or commit it

```
git push
```

```
Everything up-to-date
```
when we push git tells us there is nothing to send, because git doesn't know about that file.

Even though our computer can see that file with `ls`

```
ls
```

```
README.md	about.md	temp
```

git only looks at the working directory and compares it to the `.git` directory's snapshots of our work when we use `git status` and `git add` other commands work with the `.git` directory only


We can delete that file, since we do not need it. 
```
rm temp 
```

## Getting changes from GitHub

In your browser, make a pull request and then merge it for the changes that we pushed. It will be automatically linked to the issue, since we created the branch from the issue. Linked issues get closed when the PR is merged. 

Now, switch to main on your local copy

```
git checkout main
```

```
Switched to branch 'main'
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.
```
It tells us that it is up to date, because it is up to date with what our computer knows about GitHub.  If we used `git fetch` then `git status` it would tell us we were behind. Then we would have to apply the changes to our working directory after we fetched them.  We can fetch and apply them at the same time with `git pull`. 

```
git pull
```

```
remote: Enumerating objects: 1, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (1/1), done.
remote: Total 1 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
Unpacking objects: 100% (1/1), 639 bytes | 639.00 KiB/s, done.
From https://github.com/introcompsys/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1
   3f54148..0169e39  main       -> origin/main
Updating 3f54148..0169e39
Fast-forward
 about.md | 0
 1 file changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 about.md
```

Here we see 2 sets of messages.  Some lines start with "remote" and other lines do not. 
The "remote" lines are what `git` on the GitHub server said in response to our request and the 
other lines are what `git` on your local computer said. 

So, here, it counted up the content, and then sent it on GitHub's side. On the local side, it unpacked (remember git compressed the content before we sent it). It describes the changes that were made on the 
GitHub side, the main branch was moved from one commit to another. So it then updates the local main branch accordingly ("Updating 3f54148..0169e39") then it tells the type of update ("Fast-forward") and describes a summary of the changes made to each file (created `about.md` empty).
  
We can see that this updates th working directory too: 
```
ls
```

```
README.md	about.md
```

We've used `git checkout` to switch branchs before.  To also create a branch at the same time, we use the `-b` option. 

```
git checkout -b fill-in-about
```

```
Switched to a new branch 'fill-in-about'
```
and git tells us what it has done. 

## Editing a file on the terminal 

we used the [nano text editor](https://www.nano-editor.org/dist/latest/nano.html).  `nano` is simpler than other text editors that tend to be more popular among experts, `vim` and `emacs`.  Getting comfortable with nano will get you used to the ideas, without putting as much burden on your memory.  This will set you up to learn those later, if you need a more powerful terminal text editor. 

```
nano about.md
```

this opens the nano program on the terminal.  it displays reminders of the commands at the bottom of th screen and allows you to type into the file right away. 

Navigate with your keyboard arrows, add your name to the file.  Then, write out (save), it will prompt the file name.  Since we opened nano with a file name (`about.md`) specified, you will not need to type a new name, but to confirm it, by pressing enter/return. 

Now, we check in with git again. 

```
git status
```

```
On branch fill-in-about
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
	modified:   about.md

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

This is very similar to when we checked after creating the file before, but, notice a few things are different.  
- the first line tells us the branch but does not compare to origin. (this branch does not have a linked branch on GitHub)
- thefile is listed as "not staged" instead of untracked
- it gives us the choice to add it to then commit OR to restore it to undo the changes

```
git add .
```

we'll add, since we want these changes

```
git status
```

```
On branch fill-in-about
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
	modified:   about.md

```

and commit. 
```
git commit -m "add my name"
```

```
[fill-in-about c28b4ad] add my name
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
```

and push
```
git push
```

```
fatal: The current branch fill-in-about has no upstream branch.
To push the current branch and set the remote as upstream, use

    git push --set-upstream origin fill-in-about

```
It cannot push, because it does not know where to push, like we noted above that it did not comapre to origin, that was beecause it does not have an "upstream branch" or a corresponding branch on a remote server. 

However, git helps us out and tells us how to add one. So we do as advised. 


```
git push --set-upstream origin fill-in-about
```

```
Enumerating objects: 5, done.
Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (2/2), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 265 bytes | 265.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 1), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
remote: Resolving deltas: 100% (1/1), completed with 1 local object.
remote: 
remote: Create a pull request for 'fill-in-about' on GitHub by visiting:
remote:      https://github.com/introcompsys/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1/pull/new/fill-in-about
remote: 
To https://github.com/introcompsys/github-in-class-brownsarahm-1.git
 * [new branch]      fill-in-about -> fill-in-about
branch 'fill-in-about' set up to track 'origin/fill-in-about'.
```

This time the returned message from the remote includes the link to the page to make a PR. Visit that and make and merge the PR. 

Note though, that this does not change your local copy. 

```
git status
```

```
On branch fill-in-about
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/fill-in-about'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Even the main branch does not change

```
git checkout main
```

```
Switched to branch 'main'
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.
```

but it does not *know* that it is behind until we fetch or pull again. 


## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2023-02-02.md
```



## Prepare for Next Class

```{include} ../_prepare/2023-02-02.md
```



## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2023-02-02.md
```



## Experience Report Evidence

For today's class evidence 


## Questions After Today's Class 

### How does the computer hold the information for my github account after I shut it off?
It stores your account information in files on your system. 

### How does the terminal know that our upstream server is github? 

We cloned the repo from github. This can also be configured manually.  We can even add more then one available remote in a single repo.  Each branch will have a specific, single upstream, but two branches in the same repo can have different upstreams. 

### Could I have edited my experience reflection in terminal if I wanted?

Yes! 

### What is the best way to get comfortible with the terminal?

Lots of practice. Start with the recently posted badges, they're designed to give you good practice. 

### What is a .md file?

[Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)

### Are there any disadvantages to using nano as opposed to something like VIM?

nano only has simple features. For simple tasks, there's no disadvantage.  For complex tasks it would likely be more laborious. 

### Is there going to be somewhere we can see all of git hubs syntax for the terminal?

I passed out a printed [cheatsheet from GitHub](https://education.github.com/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf) with a good amount of the sytax. If you did not get one, let me know. 

### If I close the terminal is everything we did saved?

Yes, everything we did today in the terminal was directly manipulating files. The log of what commands we ran is even likely saved, but not necessarily in an easy to find and use file.  

### Is it possible for me to perform everything that I need to with git through the terminal?

git is a command line tool, by defition. The git program is **only** available on the terminal.  Other programs like GitHub Desktop or VSCode can do git operations, but typically only a subset.  There is also only a subset of git operations available on GitHub.com. 

There are however, some GitHub things that there is no command line tool for. 

### How do I create different versions of my code on GitHub?

branches!

### Is `origin` the name used by git terminal to reference github's servers?

In our repos we have seen so far origin has always poointed to a specific repo on GitHub.  `origin` is just the default name, so, there could be no `origin` and the repo still have the `remote` be a GitHub repo.  

We will see soon that we can work with multiple remotes, for example with a GitHub fork.  In that case, there would be two different remotes tht each point to a GitHub repo. 

### How to commit multiple files at once?

add more than one file to the staging area before commiting. 

### Is there a way to work with other things (issues, actions, etc) in the terminal?

For GitHub, yes! 