---
keyword: intro

---
# Welcome and Introduction


## Introductions


You can see more about me in the about section of the syllabus.


I look forward to getting to know you all better.


## Prismia 

- instead of slides
- you can message us
- we can see all of your responses
- emoji! 


Are emoji fun or do they make me Old? 
_no penalty, this is for fun & to practice_

- [ ] fun
- [ ] not cool

questions can also be "graded" 

- this is instant feedback
- participation will be checked, not impact your final grade
- this helps both me and you know how you are doing

What is the topic of this course? 

- [ ] hardware
- [ ] programming 
- [x] computer systems and programming tools 


or open ended 


What is one thing you want the TAs and I to know about you? 



### Some Background



- What programming environments do you have?


- What programming environments are you most comfortable with?


what programming tools are you familiar with? 
__send exactly one tool name per message, but you can send multiple messages__


This information will help me prepare


### My focus is for you to learn


- that means, practice, feedback, and reflection
- you should know that you have learned
- you should be able to apply this material in other courses


## Getting started with KWL charts


Your [KWL](kwlmin) chart is where you will start by tracking what you know now/before we start and what you want to learn about each topic.  Then you will update it throughout the semester.


````{margin}
```{admonition} Further Reading

GitHub Docs are really helpful and have screenshots

- [editing a file](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files)
- [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request)
```
````


Today we did the following:
1. Accept the assignment to create your repo: [KWL Chart](https://classroom.github.com/a/CeBxAe-e)
1. Edit the README (only file there) to add your name by clicking the pencil icon ([editing a file](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files) step 2)
1. adding a descriptive commit message ([editing a file](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files) step 5)
1. created a new branch (named `priorknowledge`) ([editing a file](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files) step 7-8)
1. added a message to the Pull Request ([pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) step 5)
1. Creating a pull request ([pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request) step 6)
1. Clicking Merge Pull Request


## Git and GitHub terminology


We also discussed some of the terminology for git. We will also come back to these ideas in greater detail later.


##  What is this course about?


In your KWL chart, there are a lot of different topics that are not obviously related, so what is this course really about?



- practical exposure to important tools
- design features of those tool categories
- basic knowledge of many parts of the CS core
- focus on the connections



We will use learning the tools to understand how computer scientists think and work.





Then we will use the tools to examine the field of Computer Science top to bottom (possibly out of order).


### How it fits into your CS degree
````{margin}
```{tip}
knowing where you've been and where we're going will help you understand and remember
```
````



In CSC110, you learn to program in python and see algorithms from a variety of domain areas where computer science is applied.


Then in CSC 340 and 440 you study the algorithms more mathematically, their complexity, etc.


In CSC211, 212, you learn the foundations of computer science: general programming and data structures.


Then in 301, 305, 411, 412 you study different aspects of software design and how computers work.


In this class, we're going to connect different ideas. We are going to learn the tools used by computer scientists, deeply. You will understand why the tools are the way they are and how to use them even when things go wrong.





## Course Admin 

### Programming is Collaborative


There are two very common types of collaboration
- code review (workign independently and then reviewing)
- pair programming (sitting together and discussing while writing)


We are going to build your skill in the *code review* model.  This means you need to collaborate, but collaboration in school tends to be more stressful than it needs to. If students have different goals or motivation levels it can create conflict.  So **you will have no group graded work** but you will get the chance to work on something together in a low stakes way.  



You will have a "home team" that you work with throughout the semester to build a
glossary and a "cookbook" of systems recipes.  


Your contributions and your **peer reviews** will be assessed individually for your grade, but you need a team to be able to practice these collaborative aspects.



[team formation survey](https://forms.gle/hEWE8hNUjxnYMGbt7)

```{important}
Remember to fill out the [team formation survey](https://forms.gle/hEWE8hNUjxnYMGbt7)
```


### Class forum

This [community repository "assignment"](https://classroom.github.com/a/vos-ATPb) will add you to a "team" with the whole class. It allows us to share things on GitHub, for the whole class, but not the whole internet.  

```{important}
When you click that link join the existing team, do not make a new one
```

### Get Credit for Today's class


1. Run your Experience Reflection (incalss) action on your kwl repo 
2. today's evidence is your KWL repo existing and having the commits as above


## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2023-01-24.md
```




## Prepare for Next Class

```{include} ../_prepare/2023-01-26.md
```


## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2023-01-24.md
```



## Questions After Today's Class 

```{note}
I will add the rest later, today I had a one time conflict.
```

### How to directly merge all suggestions without clicking commit suggestion?

Unfortunately, that is not an option on a PR review, but in general, you will not make a lot of changes in a review.  We will learn other ways to do this

### What is the importance of github in the real world? Is it so people can collaborate on code together, or maybe its somewhere to share your code and help others/inspire
other code writers or a combination of both?


### How do I add collaborators to my repository?

### How does the grading work in this class?